RESOURCE PAPER 56

RISING INDIAN FURNITURE INDUSTRY :
Prospective Invigorating Japan-India Synergy

by
Manjeet Bhullar
Vibhu Vaibhav

RESOURCE PAPER 56

RISING INDIAN FURNITURE INDUSTRY :
Prospective Invigorating Japan-India Synergy

by
Manjeet Bhullar
Vibhu Vaibhav

Dear Readers,
“Two roads diverged in a wood and I - I took the one less travelled by, and that has
made all the difference”, said Robert Frost.
We have been bringing out a Resource Paper every two months to foster interest
and collaboration between the Japanese and Indian businesses and cultures. The
current issue “Rising Indian Furniture Industry: Prospective Invigorating JapanIndia Synergy” explores a promising yet largely untapped sector with significant
potential for Japan-India cooperation.
Our authors, Mr. Manjeet Bhullar and Mr. Vibhu Vaibhav, have dedicated
considerable effort to shed light on how both countries can work together for
mutual benefit in this domain .
Mr. Manjeet Bhullar, a distinguished veteran Captain and Lalit Kala Academy
award winner, is a renowned personality in the bespoke Lifestyle Design Industry.
Through his Manjeet Bhullar Design brand and Arteform Designs Pvt. Ltd. he is
leading a design revolution that seamlessly integrates art, heritage, sustainability,
and innovation, aligning perfectly with the Make in India vision.
Mr. Vibhu Vaibhav, a seasoned technocrat and strategist with a distinguished
military career as a Colonel, brings expertise in Infrastructure, Defence
Procurement and Supply Chain Management.
He has been instrumental in handling complex Procurement Projects through
project planning and process improvement strategy.
We believe this resource paper will serve as a valuable guide for entrepreneurs and
stakeholders interested in exploring collaborative opportunities within the
furniture sector. We look forward to your insights and engagement as we continue
to promote meaningful partnerships between our two nations.

August 2025

Suguna Ramamoorthy
Secretary General, IJCCI

Rising Indian Furniture Industry :
Prospective Invigorating Japan-India Synergy
Genesis
From bare basic to ergonomic, luxurious, lifestyle statement to specialist
roles, the Furniture Industry has evolved worldwide and is today one of the
largest employers of direct/indirect manpower in the world. It is also a fastgrowing sector which holds exciting potential for growth and collaboration.
India is amongst the top three fastest growing economies in the world. As the
most populous country with the largest middle class coupled with the advent
of rapid urbanisation, the people are increasingly becoming aspirational and
that has led to a spurt in the Home Furnishing industry of which the Furniture
Industry is one of the subsets along with textiles and home furnishing
accessories thus holding an exciting growth potential.
Worldwide Furniture Industry
Size Estimation: Worldwide the furniture industry is estimated to be USD
568 Bn in 2024 to USD 597.71 Bn in 2025, and is expected to grow to an
estimated USD 878.14 Bn by 2032 at a CAGR of 5.65%.(2025 F. B.,
Fortune Business Insight 07 July 2025). The Asia Pacific commands the
largest share at 48.68%. This demand is fuelled by growing aspirations,
urbanisation demand for better living, amenities, growing global focus on
home renovation and quality décor as well as the need for formal convention
areas, office spaces and meeting rooms. China by far remains the largest
manufacturer and exporter of furniture in the world.

Segmentation and Materiality: Living room furniture remains the largest
segment with a valuation of USD 213.55 Bn in 2025. (2025 h. ,
https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/furniture/worldwide 2025).Wood
continues to hold the sway as the most preferred material with a share of
approximately 62.89% followed closely by metal plastic and others. Overall,
this industry is on a major upwards growth trajectory and exports are fast
becoming a major attraction, a source of revenue and employment generation.
An Insight into the Indian Furniture Industry
Valuation: As per IMARC Services Pvt Ltd 2025 report, (2025, IMARC Group
Pvt Ltd 2025)the Indian furniture industry was valued at USD 23.8 Bn in 2024
and is estimated to reach USD 44.2 Bn by 2033 at an impressive CAGR of 6.4%.

Materiality: Wood furniture has 59.8% of the Indian market while the
speciality stores garnered 46.5% share in comparison with the online stores
and unorganised sector. Residential demand continued to fuel the growth
with an estimated 70.6% of the market share as compared to 29.4% for the
commercial sector
Domination of Unorganised Sector: The Indian furniture industry is still
driven and dominated by the unorganised sector. This sector comprises of a vast
network of skilled craftsmen,small-scale manufacturers and local carpenters
operating outside formal business structures and a plethora of MSMEs which
need immense handholding.Nevertheless, this unorganised sector has played a
major role in employment generation, but thrives on old archaic skill sets.

Regulatory, Compliances and Standardisation: In the Indian market,
regulatory standards and compliances are a major concern mostly due to the
lack of awareness and due diligence. The sector is fragmented by nature and
is challenged by lack of standardisation and inconsistent pricing.
Access to Technology and Lack of Process Innovation: India faces
limited quality access to technology and process innovation which stifles
modernisation efforts. These constraints severely limit the sector’s ability to
compete on the international stage, resulting in modest export capabilities
and stunted overall growth.
Advent of Organised Sector: The organised sector, which comprises
branded companies and larger manufacturers though of much smaller size,
is still increasing its share percentage slowly but steadily.

The Online Segment: The latest entrant is the online segment which too has
increased its market share. With changing lifestyle and aspirations of the younger
generation in India, this segment has picked up in a major way every two months
after the covid era and is the fastest growing segment today.
Indian Furniture Exports: India currently ranks as the 16th largest
exporter in this industry but the share of exports is a paltry 1.12% of overall
global exports and USD 2.86 Bn. in 2022. This is despite the fact that India
is amongst the top five furniture producers in the world. There exists a
strong potential to look at a larger pie of these exports for India which will be
a substantial enabler for growing employment and generating wealth in the
country. Some of the major exports by India are to the USA, Germany and
the UK with a percentage share of their respective overall imports being
2.48%, 1.99%, and 1.66%, respectively. Wooden furniture is the major
export component comprising 85% of the exports. Of late, India has
increased its wood exports with an encouraging increase of 2.53 times from
US$ 246 million in 2013-14 to US$ 623 million in 2022-23.
(https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-online-furniture-industry,
https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-online-furniture-industry).

Driving Factors for Growth of Indian Furniture Industry
Impact of Rapid Urbanisation: The Indian Furniture industry is on a
positive upswing. Rapid urbanisation has led to aspirational customer
preferences and changing lifestyles. Urbanisation has also fuelled growth in

both residential and commercial sectors thus increasing demand with a
strong emphasis on renovation and remodelling in residential and
commercial segments.
Largest Middle Class in the World: India has the largest middle class in
the world and this segment with disposable income and desire to own are by
themselves a driving growth engine. Furniture is being looked upon as
something which is comfortable and aesthetically appealing and yet has a
tinge of luxury associated with it.
Changing Demographics and Preferences: The young generation fed on
rapidly evolving social media has easy access to latest design statements
which drives the demand for visually appealing and distinct furniture.
Increased awareness about sustainability is helping in creating much
greener products and processes.
E-Commerce and Online Industry: The rise of e-commerce and online
furniture industry has democratised furniture shopping with their twin key
aspects of informed pricing and aided decision making as prominent factors
which is rapidly driving growth due to enhanced purchase experience as
well as hassle free delivery and installation.
Rising Aspirations and Newer Segments of Furniture: There is a growing
appreciation and yearning to have designer furniture and premium home décor
solutions. Newer segments like modular kitchens, children's furniture,
wardrobes and bathroom furniture are the new driving verticals being created.
Advent and Growth of Organised Sector: Though the unorganised
segment still holds sway, yet, it is the organised segment coupled with the
online segment which is gaining market share. The competitive landscape
offered by them and driven by system driven processes, product
differentiation, innovative designs, diverse product portfolios, strategic
brand value and strategic partnerships backed by prominent marketing
strategies are altering the landscape.
Luxury Segment on Rise in India: A major change is coming with the now
growing luxury segment which is driven by increasing disposable income

and rising aspirations moulding customer preferences. Preference for
modular and multifunctional furniture is on a rise as is the desire to have
customised and personalised furniture.
Modern Trends and Growth in Hospitality and Modern Commercial
Sectors: Surging demand from hospitality, workspace demands like coworking spaces, IT sector and the push from e-commerce is fast propelling
the industry.
Major Indian Govt Initiatives: The Indian govt has taken multiple steps.
Multi modal logistics nodes are being set up across the country which will
greatly help with transport logistics. India has signed ECTA (Indo Australia
economic cooperation and trade agreement) with Australia and CEPA
(Comprehensive economic partnership agreement) with the UAE.
Thesetwo agreements will aid in duty free market access for the Indian
furniture. Industry quality standards are now being defined to ensure similar
quality standards across the materials being used in the industry.
Challenges Faced by Indian Furniture Industry
Availability of Quality Raw Material: Scarce availability of quality raw
material especially the required certified wood gets accentuated by the
relatively small scale of commercial forestry operations which limit access to
quality timber. There is a difference of almost 25% in the raw material cost
between India and China. The overall dependence on imports adds to the
overheads and uncertainty often adding to cost overruns and delays.
Quality Hardware and Fittings: Majority of the quality hardware and
fittings are not manufactured in India and have to be imported. With the
added import duties, they rarely become cost effective and add on to the
bulging overheads.
Challenges of Unorganised Sector: The larger share of the unorganised
sector which is challenged by limited availability of desired skill sets and
modernisation often yields nonstandard products with inconsistent quality
and varied pricing. Widespread fragmentation and labour coupled with
energy power and transportation challenges add to the issues.

Paucity of Skill Development: There is an acute paucity of organised and
certified skill development centres.
Compliance, Regulatory and Infrastructure Challenges: Lack of
dedicated infrastructure like furniture parks lead to higher logistics
overheads and quite often there is little understanding about the
compliances, safety norms and regulatory obligations of the target countries
which often lead to export challenges.
Adoption of System Driven Processes: Overall competitiveness is also
hampered due to lack of system driven processes and practices which
hamper ideal quality assurance and quality control checks. Aversion to data
driven processes for inventory management and processes hamper desired
quality and production levels and lead to systematic inefficiencies in
production planning, stock management, and supply chain coordination.
Development of Newer Products and Materiality: The thrust towards
development of newer products and exploring materiality quite often remains ad
hoc. All these factors are further emboldened by the lack of a dedicated nodal
ministry and comprehensive policy making at the National level for furniture
industry per se.
Insight Into Japanese Furniture Industry
Market: The Japanese furniture market is estimated to be USD 23.15 Bn in
2025 with a projection of growth to USD 26.22 Bn by the year 2030. This
translates to a CAGR of 2.52%. (2025 h.-r.-f.-m.,https://www.mordor
intelligence.com/industry-reports/ japan-furniture-market 2025).

Peculiarities of Japanese Furniture Industry: A significant ageing
population has also influenced the design concepts with emphasis on ease of
use and creation of single person home market which is quite unique to
Japan. Space saving, multifunctional, mobility support with comfort,
minimalist designs with maximum impact and practicality are the hall
marks. The rising disposable income, increased urbanisation are now
driving the growth of the industry. The high end and luxury segment is quite
popular in Japan.
Ethical Sourcing and Sustainability: Japanese consumers have high
quality and design expectations, and lay a great emphasis on ethical
sourcing and sustainability and also have a deep connect with their cultural
heritage and urban living.
Traditional Craftsmanship: Emphasis remains on traditional
craftsmanship and aesthetics with stringent quality and sustainability
standards. Wood remains the dominant material while the metal too is
gaining much attraction. Home furniture has the largest market share
followed by commercial sector, hospitals and hospitality.
Domination of Local Industry: The local industry dominates with IKEA
opening its first store only in 2005-06. The distribution channel is led by the
speciality stores followed by supermarkets/hypermarkets with the online
industry now gaining more interest and market share.
Inherent Industry Strengths: The strength of the industry in Japan lies in
materiality, hardware, quality control, longevity and sustainability. The
desires compliances and regulatory standards are well in place and there is a
great emphasis to empower manpower with the requisite skill sets and
certifications. The highly process driven nature of industry is a major
strength and ensures quality of workmanship, optimum materiality and
timely delivery.
Imports: A large quantum of furniture is being imported into Japan with
China being the largest at 40% of the trade volume. There exists an immense
opportunity to explore this segment.

Exploring Japan-India Areas of Collaboration in Furniture
Industry
Blending of Ancient Cultures; Modernising Traditional
Craftsmanship: Both Japan and India are ancient countries with a strong
sense of nationalism and culture. This deep understanding is an essential
connect to the essence of design form. There is an immense potential to
synergise our traditional craftsmanship together and bring out the best in
them.
Innovations and Utilisation of Environment Friendly Materials: There
is an immense potential to move towards a more sustainable manufacturing
process as well as choose the right raw material which has passed through
the sustainability checks. Incorporating biophilic designs by making use of
natural fibres etc. will help in connecting more closely with nature and
space planning which is also the essence of our respective cultures.
Logistics: Japan has a very efficient logistics and supply chain model for
all industries. In India, the overheads pertaining to challenges of logistics
and transportation itself are humungous. A synergy in this aspect will
greatly help in optimising these cost overheads by bringing in the best
practices in place.
Challenges of the Unorganised Sector: With almost 80% of current
market being controlled by the unorganised sector in India in the furniture
industry, there is a major requirement to get this sector more refined in terms
of incorporating system and processes, an organised way of functioning,
bringing in more efficiency and creating a well oiled eco system of supply
chain. It will be a long process but the right partnerships and collaborations
will immensely help in bringing out a transformational change.
Upskilling and Skill Development: As we move more and more towards
automation, finding requisite skilled labour with the desired technical skill
sets is becoming a daunting challenge. There are hardly any institutes where
skill upgradation is being formally imparted in a structured manner and this

is a ripe opportunity to bring in fruitful collaboration. Skilled manpower
will go a long way in cutting down our costings and bring in better
efficiencies in tune with the international standards and directly impact
profitability. Specialised training institutes with well honed trained
teaching staff and curriculum and bolstered by well recognised certification
will be instrumental in churning out skilled manpower in desired numbers
and skill sets. Deft and precise training programmes for skill development
and vocational training will help fine tuning skills for design,
manufacturing, imbibing technology, gaining confidence and
understanding sustainability in its true sense.
Incorporating Better Modern Technology: World over, it is the desired
marketplace that upskills the factories since the demand from the
marketplace will dictate the quality and kind of product being produced by
the respective factories. This can be brought about by blending in modern
technologiesand incorporating process improvement to help stay ahead of
the learning curve. An active collaboration with Japan in this arena where
the Japanese companies can bring in their inherent strength will be a winwin situation.Supply chains can be digitised end to end and deliveries
mapped out. This will bring in transparency in costing, documentation,
material availability, available lead times, bring in quality control and
quality assurance as well. Technology will thus through digital and
automation transformation become an enabler for cost minimisation and
enhanced efficacy.
Creating Industry Clusters and Handholding MSMEs: As on date, we do
not have dedicated furniture industry clusters of the desired size, scale, volume
and composition in India. We need to dwell upon this aspect and need to bring
in fully integrated clusters with well encapsulated ecosystems. A collaborative
approach in this aspect will help all stakeholders to synergise their existing
resources and provide opportunities for them to acquire technology, access
capital, upgrade skills, reduce transportation and logistics overheads. This will
also greatly benefit our MSMEs who will be a key component in these clusters

by allowing them to handle large orders or meet the needs of international
buyers while at the same time enhance their efficiencies.
Promote Govt-Industry Collaboration: We have quite a few industry
bodies in furniture industry which collaborate with the govt on various
issues pertaining to the industry. However, much more can be done in this
arena. Policy making, putting forth the concerns of the industry, hand
holding of the unorganised sector, ease of access to capital for growth and
expansionalong with G2G initiatives are a few probable areas to start with.
Luxury Furniture Segment: This is perhaps the fastest growing and the most
profitable segment world over and especially in India. Rapid urbanisation
coupled with aspirational expectations duly bolstered by a growing economy has
brought in great potential in this sector. Blending of design aesthetics and
transforming them into final products of due significance can be a test bed of
collaborative efforts between Japan India industries.
Hardware and Fitment Accessories Segment: India is still a long way off
from developing high quality hardware and fitment accessories with a
majority of them being imported which add on to our cost overheads and the
balance being manufactured domestically but mainly in unorganised sector
where right quality and timely delivery leaves much to be desired. A
collaborative effort with synergised energies in this domain in the long term
has potential to create world class hardware and fitment accessory segment
within India with due help from Japan to meet both domestic and
voluminous exports.
e-Commerce and Online Growth: The online industry is here to stay and
grow much faster in times to come. By bringing in design synergy through
collaborative efforts, there exists a potential to explore joint ventures
worldwide fuelled by online platforms. Geographical separations will get
bridged by digital bridges to create newer design forms and facilitate delivery
across the world thus bringing out better efficacy and channelising resources.
This will also help in tapping the immense export potential together which at
this time is currently languishing and has the potential to be a game changer.

Brand Recognition: Value and Management. The Japanese firms are adept
in brand recognition and with that they bring in a lot of value to their
respective brands and overall products by inculcating finer brand
management. This is something that the Indian Furniture industry has not
yet mastered and we need to learn and harness this. Collaborative efforts
with Japan will bring in much better valuation and recognition to Indian
firms and this is a new area where much more can be explored together.
Way Ahead
Deft collaboration between Japan and India who are in the top four global
economies GDP wise is a win-win situation. Synergies can be built up. The
unorganised sector in India is looking for handholding, mentors who can
assist in bringing about a quality change. Japan has the capability and
capacity to be a collaborative partner in this industry. In India, there is
immense faith in the Japanese ability and intent to bring in a fair and just
collaborative changeover. The time is ripe to take a de novo look at this
sunrise sector in a collaborative way in which we bring in our respective
strengths together to create a win-win business opportunity.
Bibliography
2025, F. B. (Fortune Business Insight 07 July 2025). Fortune Business Insight 07 July 2025. Fortune
Business Insight 07 July 2025: Fortune Business Insight 07 July 2025.
2025, h. (https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/furniture/worldwide 2025).
https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/furniture/worldwide 2025.
https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/furniture/worldwide 2025:
https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/furniture/worldwide 2025.
2025, h.-r.-f.-m. (https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/japan-furniture-market 2025).
https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/japan-furniture-market 2025.
https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/japan-furniture-market 2025:
https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/japan-furniture-market 2025.
2025, I. G. (IMARC Group Pvt Ltd 2025). https://www.imarcgroup.com/india-furniture-market. IMARC Group
Pvt Ltd 2025.
https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-online-furniture-industry. (https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-onlinefurniture-industry). https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-online-furniture-industry.
https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-online-furniture-industry: https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-onlinefurniture-industry.
ltd, i. s. ( imarc services pvt ltd 2025). https://www.imarcgroup.com/india-furniture-market.
https://www.imarcgroup.com/india-furniture-market: https://www.imarcgroup.com/india-furniture-market.

